well all this week Israel has been
bracing for retaliatory attacks from
Hezbollah in Lebanon and from Iran it
follows the assassination of terror
group leaders in Beirut and Tyron last
week Israel is protected by a
sophisticated air defense system that it
has been developing for
decades April
2024 Israel sustains a massive missile
barrage from Iran more than 300 drones
rockets and miss missiles form a
coordinated
attack for Israel's air defense systems
it's the greatest challenge yet Israel
claims it intercepted 99% of those
hostile missiles and drones so how does
it achieve that kind of success it's
down to a multi-layered air defense
approach comprising a number of moving
Parts in some cases quite literally
truck towed missile units form the
innermost layer the Iron Dome it tackles
short-range threats such as rockets and
mortars and was developed with help from
the US it has intercepted thousands of
rockets since it was instituted in 2011
and Israel claims it has a 90% success
rate next comes David's sling for
midrange threats that is designed to
shoot down ballistic missiles fared from
between 40 km to 300 km away again it
was developed in collaboration with the
US and the outermost layer is the arrow
for the longer range ballistic missiles
it operates outside the Earth's
atmosphere in space which allows for the
safe dispersal of any non-conventional
Warheads regardless of the method
intercepting Rockets is a costly
business the cost of one Arrow intercept
a missile is between 2 and $3.5 million
according to Media reports 110 of them
were used to defend against the Iranian
attack suggesting a cost of $385 million
the mid-range Rockets from the David
sling system are about $1 million each
estimates put the cost at 550 million to
$1.1 billion just for the April
operation there is another important
layer too Israel's Air Force a key part
of its defense
picture and in addition to all this
there are new tools coming online such
as the laser powered iron beam set to be
integrated into Israel's multi-layered
and seemingly successful air defense
system well I'm joined Now by air Vice
Marshal Shawn Bell he's a former pilot
in the UK's Royal Air Force and is now
an adviser at Universal defense and
Security Solutions in London Mr Bell
it's good to have you with us this
evening you know I think everyone is
looking at this situation and asking
them if there is an attack by air
against Israel will the Iron Dome be
enough to protect the country what do
you
say yeah good evening Brent um well the
iron D alone won't be enough um but the
layered system of defenses you got to
remember Israel is the dominant military
force in the region um it's on the 13th
of April it sustained that massive wave
of attacks and managed to repel most of
them and it's therefore it's tried and
tested in terms of its systems I would
say though what we've got to be careful
of here here is that the Iron Dome for
example you you mentioned is very very
capable but most these systems only have
so many missiles available at one time
and you can Deluge um fire literally
thousands of missiles at the system and
actually overcome it the great thing
about the Iron Dome is it differentiates
it only looks at the missiles that are
going to strike builtup areas and any
that are just going to go into the
desert it ignores so Israel's got a very
comprehensive system but it won't just
be about Israel repelling this attack uh
as we saw on the 13th of April when Iran
put that massive wave of attacks in
Coalition efforts were also very
important which include the Royal Air
Force the United States Air Force and
others all helping protect Israel's
Skies yeah the Pentagon says it expects
any Iranian retaliation to follow a
similar game plan to the attacks that we
saw April 13th of this year perhaps
larger in scope with Hezbollah
participating in Leb and we know that
Hezbollah has thousands and thousands of
rockets that it could launch so talk to
me about the role of Israel's allies if
this indeed
happens there's two sides to that Brent
um one of those is if Iran was serious
about hurting Israel it could do that um
but it would also know that if it
mounted an attack to at that did was
effective they killed lots of civilians
and um was deemed effective that Israel
would be for to respond the situation
would escalate and Iran blatantly does
not want that to happen at the moment
Iran's pride has been hurt because
Ishmael hanene has been killed on its
territory and it's been waiting since
the 31st of July when that attack
occurred in order to work out what to do
but it's trying to find a measured
response that demonstrates to its
internally to Iran that it's serious
it's credible but it also wants to avoid
precipitating a war with Israel and I
think that's one of the reasons why
we're seeing a very cautious measured
response because if even though on that
fateful day on the 13th of April nearly
all the missiles were shut down and the
only ones that got through to Israel
actually hit a military targets and they
were brushed away pretty quickly I think
that's seen as a successful attack from
Iran because they can show the
devastation the large numbers but
actually didn't precipitate a regional
war and I think that's what why we're
seeing this poor and the delay and it'll
be very interesting to see how Iran
responds but it looks like Israel's had
a a dress rehearsal if you like for this
on the 13th of April and I have no doubt
they will be better more effective at
shooting down those weapons if they if
the big Barr comes again well Mr let me
ask you about this this dress rehearsal
I mean if we look at it from the other
way around Iran was able to glean lots
of information back in April um about
Israeli military positions for example
as well as the Alli and what weapons
they use to repel that air strike so for
Iran April looks a lot like a rehearsal
for what is about to happen um in the
near future is would you agree with
that well yes I mean one of the things
about military capability is it's it's
not what you see it's what you don't see
um the US and particular the West Prides
itself on its technology being its
asymmetric advantage and I suspect that
Iran would have hoped that most of its
missile systems would have been more
effective uh in April than they were
what's fascinating is that Russia has
also been delivering uh surface to
surface missile systems and air defense
systems to Iran but there's been lots of
speculation that because these systems
are meant to be state of thee art Russia
claims they are undefeatable and yet
Ukrainian forces in Ukraine have been
defeating them so it'll be really
interesting to see whether Russia's
supplies of missiles that Iran is
allowed to use those and even if it does
the West will learn a lot about Russia's
military capability if they're used so
bluntly Iran is not well known for
having a high-end military capability it
almost certainly uh shot its bolt um in
in April and we very concerned to make
sure that it doesn't give away all its
state secrets and its capability uh in
one shot Sean Bell with universal
defense and Security Solutions Mr Bell
we appreciate your time and your
analysis tonight thank you
welcome rent Mark kenian is a retired US
Marine Colonel and Senior advisor at the
center for strategic and International
Studies welcome to DW Israel's iron
doome defense system can be overwhelmed
at times how often does that happen
though it doesn't appear to have
happened very often during the uh
conflict with Hamas Hamas fired hundreds
of missiles Israel was able to inter
almost all of them it hasn't run out
same with Hezbollah and same with the
attacks in April it's important to keep
in mind that this is only one part of
the Israeli defense system as we just
heard there were two other parts plus
there's the Air Force and it's also
important to keep in mind that the
United States is involved United States
has ships offshore they participated in
defending Israel in the last attacks in
April uh and would participate in
defense on any future attacks so is the
the bigger concern here uh Regional
support as well as us support I mean
what happens if uh Israel doesn't have
the added support of regional powers
like Saudi Arabia and
Jordan they're not really dependent on
Saudi Arabia uh but they do want to uh
maintain ties ofi Saudi Arabia because
they don't want this war with Hamas to
become a regional War Hamas has been
trying since the very beginning to make
this not just Hamas versus Israel but a
regional war against Israel and so far
they have not succeeded uh Hezbollah has
participated some but not extensively of
course there a lot of question now about
hezbollah's role since Israel has
assassinated one of their uh leaders
Jordan plays a very quiet role but many
of these missiles are flying over Jordan
and they want to avoid that they also
recognize that Iran is not a friend of
theirs Iran uh would uh
overturn their government so they
quietly uh provide defense how much have
Iran then and its proxies bolstered
their weapon systems in recent
years well Iran has developed this full
spectrum of capabilities short range
missiles all the way up to uh ballistic
missiles so it has become increasingly
sophisticated the proxies
domestically indigenously just build
very crude Rockets we've seen that with
Hamas for example and also with
Hezbollah the problem is that Iran sends
some of its more sophisticated missiles
to uh its proxies uh and then they use
these missiles we've seen that
particularly with the uies who have used
Iranian missiles to attack shipping in
uh the Red Sea um there have been
reports just this week of uh Russia um
supposedly uh supplying Iran with new
systems um can we can we expect some
sort of change in Dynamics in the region
because of um various countries
support well longer term there's a
concern that Russia will
provide uh technical assistance to Iran
allow them to build more effective more
deadly uh Rockets I don't think you're
going to see any Russian missiles being
fired at Israel uh but longer term you
could see Russian components Russian
Technologies employed Russia has talked
with Iran about providing some air
defense missiles some defensive systems
um and that's possible but those would
be defensive and while that support is
stepped up what about concerns of
wearing support from the likes of the US
and others uh for those uh Keen to
support the Palestinian
effort well the United States has been
emphatic that it will provide any
defensive Aid that Israel needs uh and
will participate in the conflicts
defensively ships offshore for example
gets controversial when talking about
offensive systems because of the effect
on civilians we've seen that with Hamas
and Gaza a lot of concerns for example
about the US providing 2,000lb uh bombs
uh but uh for defensive systems I don't
think that there'll be any change in us
uh policy I can't see in with the center
for strategic and international studies
thank you very much for chiming
in thanks for having me on the show